---
title: The Personal Blog
author: Richard Xu
categories: [Random]
tags: [random]
math: true
---

# What is this?
Wander is a personal blog by Richard Xu, i.e. me. As of May 2021, I am a junior at Harvard College studying Math/Statistics while doing a concurrent masters in Computer Science. I also do a variety of extracurriculars like research, teaching and clubs. Outside of the academic sphere, I love mountain activities: hiking and skiing. When there are no mountains around me, I like to run, cook and play the piano.

The writings in these blogs consist mostly of my own thoughts. Usually, a piece will start with me proposing a question, pondering about it and then trying to make sense of it. If a topic is complex and challenging, the blog post may be less coherent as usual. I may be slightly embarassed by the incoherence, but I think these pieces are especially helpful for understanding difficult issues.

While the pieces are mostly my own thoughts, my writing process is rather collaborative. I may discuss the ideas with my peers to better understand the topic, and I contact my friends for peer editing.

## Disclaimers
Any opinions expressed in any blog post are my own, and do not reflect the opinion of my school or my employer.

Since this is a public blog, it will not contain any personal pieces. I try to write the pieces following the NY Times rule: anything I write here, I wouldn't feel embarassed about if they are published on the NY Times.

I may shut this blog down if it somehow gets too popular.

# Why "Wander"?
I had two reasons to choose the name "wander".
1. I come from a family that has lived in many places and traveled quite a bit. In many ways, I am a wanderer in this world.
2. Most of the ideas in these blog posts come from me walking outside, i.e. wandering.

# Why Start a Blog?
I think my reason for starting a blog is no different from many other personal blog authors.
1. Organize my thoughts. I am interested in many complex topics, and they can be hard to understand. Writing my thoughts down forces me to try and organize my thoughts, and the process allows me to notice the details or nuance of the topic at hand. This also sparks discussions with my friends, which would help me understand the topic better.
2. Improve my writing. English is not my first language, and I continue to value methods that improve my English writing. I think many writing comes down to expressing a set of ideas in a narrative, and writing blog posts is a great way to practice this.
3. Being brave. Sharing personal thoughts is somewhat scary: for example, I felt quite nervous having my teachers in HS read my college essays. However, I think there is value in being able to discuss thoughts and ideas openly and succintly with my peers. A colleague at a past internship gave me the advice "be brave", and I try to follow it.

# Technology
Before starting the blog I asked around my peers who also started their blogs. These are the technologies I settled down with.
* I am hosting this domain on AWS Route 53. The DNS is relatively easy to work with there. The other benefit is that I sometimes host react apps on richxu.com, and they are easiest done with AWS.
* The website is built with Github Pages. I am using the Jekyll Chirpy template. I think Jekyll provides a good balance of simplicity and customization, which is ideal for this blog.