---
title: Why do we Overpack our Schedules?
subtitles: A story on priorities, bias and mismatch.
author: Richard Xu
categories: [Harvard]
tags: [harvard, economics, life]
math: true
---

During the semester, I tried to meet up and call my friends from school. However, finding a good time to do so is often difficult as people have classes and meetings during most awake hours. Then, when I call, it seems that we are always swamped by work. I am also guilty of packing my schedule so tight that I can't find time for my friends or for exploring something new. However, overpacked schedules are terrible. When one meeting starts to run late, I get anxious about the next meeting. When my friends choose to not call me "because I am always busy", I feel quite lonely. *Then, why do we overpack our schedules?*

I have a variety of hypotheses about what can cause us to overpack our schedules. **Let me know if you resonate with any of them, or if you feel inspired by any.**

# Bias: Hofstadter's Law
We are terrible at measuring how long something takes to do. I think the following two results explain this well:

1. [Hofstadter's Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hofstadter%27s_law): It always takes longer than you expect, even when you take into account Hofstadter's Law.
2. [Planning Fallacy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planning_fallacy): 45% of projects are done by the 99% probability level.

There are many explanations for this phenomenon, which you can read about on the planning fallacy page. I think the strongest reason is that we plan a project at a mile-high overview. We fail to consider all the details and intricacies of the project until we do them, and they often take up the longest amount of time. For a mathematical tangent, I think this is reltaed to the coastline paradox. A coastline gets longer when we measure it more finely. Similarly, the project time gets longer the closer we exmaine it.

I think the planning fallacy also relates to many other "rules" people discuss. For example, the 80/20 rule can explain it by noting that we spend 80% of the time on 20% of the project (often bugs, incompatible issues, etc.). Another tangent is a heuristic I learned about for estimating the time for a project:
> Take your estimate time for the project, add 1, then change to the next unit. For example, a project that takes "2 hours" will take 3 days. A project that takes "a day" would be done in "2 weeks".

While I think this helps explain why we overbook our schedule, it is not the full picture. Harvard students have access to the Q guide, where students report on the time they spent on each class after they took the class. Furthermore, many clubs don't involve projects and instead work on a weekly-meeting basis. It is easier to estimate how long those clubs take to do. Then, why do we overpack our schedule?

# Priorities: What are we working on?
To start thinking about this, let's consider this scenario.
> Suppose we cut the amount of material in every Harvard class by 25%. Will students be more free?

I think the answer is a clear **no**, and the evidence comes from my quarantine. Being home allowed me to not spend time walking between classes, which essentially cuts the amount of time spent by ~25%. What did I do with the extra time? I decided to teach 2-3 more classes and continued taking 6, essentially erasing the time efficiency. I also signed up to be more involved with a couple clubs to fill those remaining free hours.

*Is this efficient?* While I would like to say that every activity I chose is beneficial, I must admit that cutting out 1-2 clubs from my schedule would have made my semester more fulfilling. I spent much of the semester cramming psets, and it was not fun. Therefore, we find an issue of priorities: spending time with my peers, family and professors should have higher priority than some of the club works I did. Yet, I chose to do the clubs instead. I suspect that this is true for my peers as well. Then, why do we sign up for these activities when they give us negative utility?

# A Mismatch for the Future: Hyperbolic Discounting
Consider the moment when a student decides to join a club or take a class. This will bring her some benefits, but will also have drawbacks in the form of time and opportunity cost. However, notice that these are not measured at the same time.
1. Much of the benefit is immediate. Let's take HCCG (a consulting club) as an example. The moment a freshman student signs up, she can put "analyst at HCCG" on her LinkedIn and imagine the Patagonia she will receive at the end of the semester.
2. The cost of the club occurs later on. The many powerpoints and long client calls are not what the student thinks of when signing up for the club. These costs also occur at the middle of the semester, which feels far away.

Economics teaches that people value the current moment disproportionately more than the future. This phenomenon is known as *hyperbolic discounting*. This helps explain why signing up for a club feels good even when it may not be beneficial.

Furthermore, **the cost of the club is indirect**. An overpacked schedule hurts a student on her *most difficult class/assignment*. For example, making a poster for the next club event might take an hour. The consequence of this is felt much later, when the student is rushing to finish her hardest CS assignment 2 hours before its due. She would not remember the hour she spent making the poster for the event, even though that hour could be spent on the CS assignment.

This goes back to the idea of priorities: **the cost of low-priority activity is often degraded performance in the high-priority activity**. This not only makes the cost more salient, it also makes it harder to detect. I believe that this is the main reason why we end up with painful overpacked schedules. We ignore the difficult moments when times are good. When the difficult times come, we stress and work hard to get through them. Then, we forget about the stress and make no changes to our schedule.

# What can we do?
This is a difficult issue, and I think the best we can do is to be aware of the phenomenon. We should notice that it exists, and value our time *as if we have a pset due in 3 hours*. This will hopefully get us to pack $\epsilon$ less in our schedules, which should be generally beneficial.

Next, I think it is important to keep our priorities straight. This does not mean cutting out all activities that are not at the top of the list. Instead, we should carefully think about each activity and what we truly value about them. I have found that talking to friends and family deserves a much higher place on my priority list than it currently gets, and am trying to adjust my schedule accordingly. This is difficult, but I believe it is important.

# Note on writing
This is a first draft. I spent around 50 minutes on this. I think it is not as coherent as it could be, and would appreciate feedback!